I can but say their protestation over.
So much, dear liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict observances:
As not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
And one day in a week to touch no food,
And but one meal on every day besides,
The which I hope is not enrolled there;
And then to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day--
When I was wont to think no harm all night,
And make a dark night too of half the day--
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep.
Let me say no, my liege, an if you please.
I only swore to study with your Grace
And stay here in your court for three years' space.
By yea and nay, sir. Then I swore in jest.
What is the end of study, let me know?
Things hid and barred, you mean, from common
sense.
Come on, then, I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus--to study where I well may dine,
   When I to feast expressly am forbid;
Or study where to meet some mistress fine
   When mistresses from common sense are hid;
Or having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath,
Study to break it, and not break my troth.
If study's gain be thus, and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know.
Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
Why, all delights are vain, and that most vain
Which with pain purchased doth inherit pain:
As painfully to pore upon a book
   To seek the light of truth, while truth the while
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look.
   Light seeking light doth light of light beguile.
So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye indeed
   By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed
   And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
   That will not be deep-searched with saucy looks.
Small have continual plodders ever won,
   Save base authority from others' books.
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights,
   That give a name to every fixed star,
Have no more profit of their shining nights
   Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know is to know naught but fame,
And every godfather can give a name.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
Well, say I am. Why should proud summer boast
   Before the birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows,
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
No, my good lord, I have sworn to stay with you.
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
   Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
Yet, confident, I'll keep what I have sworn
   And bide the penance of each three years' day.
Give me the paper. Let me read the same,
And to the strictest decrees I'll write my name.
A dangerous law against gentility.
[Reads:] Item, If any man be seen to talk with a
woman within the term of three years, he shall endure
such public shame as the rest of the court can possible
devise.
This article, my liege, yourself must break,
   For well you know here comes in embassy
The French king's daughter with yourself to speak--
   A maid of grace and complete majesty--
About surrender up of Aquitaine
   To her decrepit, sick, and bedrid father.
Therefore this article is made in vain,
   Or vainly comes th' admired princess hither.
So study evermore is overshot.
While it doth study to have what it would,
It doth forget to do the thing it should.
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
'Tis won as towns with fire--so won, so lost.
Necessity will make us all forsworn
   Three thousand times within this three years'
   space;
For every man with his affects is born,
   Not by might mastered, but by special grace.
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me:
I am forsworn on mere necessity.
So to the laws at large I write my name,
   And he that breaks them in the least degree
Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
   Suggestions are to other as to me,
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath.
[He signs his name.]
But is there no quick recreation granted?
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
I'll lay my head to any goodman's hat,
   These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
Sirrah, come on.
I know you did.
  You must not be so quick.
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast; 'twill tire.
What time o' day?
  Now fair befall your mask.
 And send you many lovers.
  Nay, then, will I be gone.
 I would you heard it groan.
  Sick at the heart.
 Would that do it good?
  Will you prick 't with your eye?
  Now God save thy life.
  I cannot stay thanksgiving.	[He exits.]
And I forsooth in love! I that have been love's whip,
A very beadle to a humorous sigh,
A critic, nay, a nightwatch constable,
A domineering pedant o'er the boy,
Than whom no mortal so magnificent.
This wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
This Signior Junior, giant dwarf, Dan Cupid,
Regent of love rhymes, lord of folded arms,
Th' anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Sole imperator and great general
Of trotting paritors--O my little heart!
And I to be a corporal of his field
And wear his colors like a tumbler's hoop!
What? I love, I sue, I seek a wife?
A woman, that is like a German clock,
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch,
But being watched that it may still go right.
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all.
And, among three, to love the worst of all,
A whitely wanton with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes.
Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard.
And I to sigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her! Go to. It is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, groan.
Some men must love my lady, and some Joan.
[He exits.]
Not you to me, but I betrayed by you.
I, that am honest, I, that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in.
I am betrayed by keeping company
With men like you, men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for Joan? or spend a minute's time
In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
A leg, a limb--
I post from love. Good lover, let me go.
A toy, my liege, a toy. Your Grace needs not fear it.
That you three fools lacked me fool to make up
the mess.
He, he, and you--and you, my liege--and I
Are pickpurses in love, and we deserve to die.
O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace.
   As true we are as flesh and blood can be.
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
   Young blood doth not obey an old decree.
We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly
Rosaline
That, like a rude and savage man of Ind
   At the first op'ning of the gorgeous East,
Bows not his vassal head and, strucken blind,
   Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
   Dares look upon the heaven of her brow
That is not blinded by her majesty?
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
   O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
Of all complexions the culled sovereignty
   Do meet as at a fair in her fair cheek.
Where several worthies make one dignity,
   Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues--
   Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not!
To things of sale a seller's praise belongs.
   She passes praise. Then praise too short doth blot.
A withered hermit, fivescore winters worn,
   Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye.
Beauty doth varnish age, as if newborn,
   And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy.
O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine!
Is ebony like her? O word divine!
   A wife of such wood were felicity.
O, who can give an oath? Where is a book,
   That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack
If that she learn not of her eye to look?
   No face is fair that is not full so black.
   Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
O, if in black my lady's brows be decked,
   It mourns that painting and usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect:
   And therefore is she born to make black fair.
Her favor turns the fashion of the days,
   For native blood is counted painting now.
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
   Paints itself black to imitate her brow.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
   For fear their colors should be washed away.
I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes.
   Her feet were much too dainty for such tread.
   Nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn.
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords.
Pell-mell, down with them. But be first advised
In conflict that you get the sun of them.
First, from the park let us conduct them thither.
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair mistress. In the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them,
Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
For revels, dances, masques, and merry hours
Forerun fair love, strewing her way with flowers.
Allons! Allons! Sowed cockle reaped no corn,
   And justice always whirls in equal measure.
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
   If so, our copper buys no better treasure.
[They exit.]
Is this your perfectness? Begone, you rogue!
[Boy exits.]
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
Tell her we measure them by weary steps.
We number nothing that we spend for you.
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without account.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face
That we, like savages, may worship it.
Nay then, two treys, an if you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, and malmsey. Well run, dice!
There's half a dozen sweets.
One word in secret.
Thou grievest my gall.
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons peas,
And utters it again when God doth please.
He is wit's peddler, and retails his wares
At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs.
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve.
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve.
He can carve too, and lisp. Why, this is he
That kissed his hand away in courtesy.
This is the ape of form, Monsieur the Nice,
That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
In honorable terms. Nay, he can sing
A mean most meanly; and in ushering
Mend him who can. The ladies call him sweet.
The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet.
This is the flower that smiles on everyone
To show his teeth as white as whale's bone;
And consciences that will not die in debt
Pay him the due of "honey-tongued Boyet."
See where it comes! Behavior, what wert thou
Till this madman showed thee? And what art thou
now?
This jest is dry to me. Gentle sweet,
Your wits makes wise things foolish. When we greet,
With eyes' best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
By light we lose light. Your capacity
Is of that nature that to your huge store
Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
I am a fool, and full of poverty.
O, I am yours, and all that I possess!
Where? When? What vizard? Why demand you this?
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
   Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Here stand I, lady. Dart thy skill at me.
   Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout.
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance.
   Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit,
And I will wish thee nevermore to dance,
   Nor nevermore in Russian habit wait.
O, never will I trust to speeches penned,
   Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue,
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
   Nor woo in rhyme like a blind harper's song.
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
   Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation,
Figures pedantical--these summer flies
   Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
I do forswear them, and I here protest
   By this white glove--how white the hand, God
   knows!--
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be expressed
   In russet yeas and honest kersey noes.
And to begin: Wench, so God help me, law,
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
  Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage. Bear with me, I am sick;
I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see:
Write "Lord have mercy on us" on those three.
They are infected; in their hearts it lies.
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
These lords are visited. You are not free,
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
Our states are forfeit. Seek not to undo us.
Peace, for I will not have to do with you.
, [to King, Longaville, and Dumaine]
Speak for yourselves. My wit is at an end.
Neither of either. I remit both twain.
I see the trick on 't. Here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight
zany,
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some
Dick,
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when she's disposed,
Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
The ladies did change favors; and then we,
Following the signs, wooed but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn in will and error.
Much upon this 'tis. [To Boyet.] And might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier?
   And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
   Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our page out. Go, you are allowed.
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you? There's an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace, I have done.
What, are there but three?
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
We are shame-proof, my lord; and 'tis some policy
To have one show worse than the King's and his
company.
A right description of our sport, my lord.
Well said, old mocker. I must needs be friends with
thee.
An thou wert a lion, we would do so.
For the "ass" to the "Jude"? Give it him.--Jud-as,
away!
Worthies, away! The scene begins to cloud.
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief,
And by these badges understand the King:
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Played foul play with our oaths. Your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deformed us, fashioning our humors
Even to the opposed end of our intents.
And what in us hath seemed ridiculous--
As love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
Formed by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
Full of strange shapes, of habits, and of forms,
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
To every varied object in his glance;
Which parti-coated presence of loose love
Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities,
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults,
Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
Is likewise yours. We to ourselves prove false
By being once false forever to be true
To those that make us both--fair ladies, you.
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be, it is impossible.
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
A twelvemonth? Well, befall what will befall,
I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
Our wooing doth not end like an old play.
Jack hath not Jill. These ladies' courtesy
Might well have made our sport a comedy.